
> From what I remember the game was a actually not really described in the book\
  right?

i think that is a really good question of discussion!

the book does clearly say the game was played with glass beads, that it
originated as a game to help music students remember their lessons, and that
it spread quickly among mathematicians. the game was also the obsession of the
elite all-male caste of the utopian Castalia, but it was clearly more than just
"a game" because they had structured their society around it -- the game was
power and status (maybe the same way playing ball was for the proto-Toltec).

i think Hesse was very conscious of the fact that the rules of any game change
over time with different players and context, new cultures and languages. the
main character's distinguishing achievement is that he somehow reconciles the
game with the study of history -- implying that he recognized how to use the
game to match the rhythms of music and the symmetries of math to the cycles of
human history. this is further alluded to in the poems and "remembered lives"
that make up the end of the book.

the pinnacle of the book is the festival of Games in which Knecht unveils new
rules -- called Chinese House -- as the new Magister Ludi. "Chinese House" is
quite explicitly based on the I Ching.

but just like the glass bead game, there is no "one way" of "playing" the I
Ching. the history of the I Ching is five thousand years of different methods,
rituals, interpretations, and rules. Chinese empires have risen and fallen
with arguments over how to properly use the I Ching, and i suspect Hesse was
making the same point about western societies. ("I Ching", btw, means "the Book
of Changes" or "the Book THAT Changes". in Chinese it is signified with the
character for a chameleon and the character signifying a stack of scrolls.)

so what was the game?

i think for some of the characters in the book it was an art, for others a
science. for others, it was just endless copying other people's games, like
zombie-musicians obsessed with recreating someone else's musical performance.

my interest is primarily in how people play it today

i have asked lots of people. Answers have ranged from "a pure-mind dialectic"
to "DUH! it is called MANCALA!" (followed by a swift exposition of the rules by
six-year-old hands, "SEE! I won!").

myself, i imagine that if Hesse was writing today, he would write the book --
and the game -- as an open-ended MMO VR experience, with no real fixed rules --
probably a game-within-a-game because Hesse liked trippy stuff like that.

mostly, i just like to play

i usually play "playground rules" where i just play the rules that are agreed
upon at the table, so every time is a different experience

one of my favorite ways to play is "guess the rules" where one player plays
some arbitrary set of finite rules while wordlessly shuffling and organizing
beads, and another tries to guess and play along. it is sort of like a jazz of
improvisation, trial and error, involving part pattern recognition and part
charades.

not unlike what we do in real life trying to figure out the rules of the
universe of quantum strangeness and relativistic bending of space-time

i'm always looking for novel or interesting sets of rules. i find that some of
the best are those that have a rhythm or a symmetry. one can communicate quite a
bit this way in ways that seem obvious, but reveal a lot of our biases.
